JUDY WOODRUFF: Tonight, we
begin the first in a series of
conversations focusing on the
future of the Democratic
Party, now out of power in the
House, in the Senate, and the
White House.
Joining us now, the co-chair
of the House Democratic Policy
and Communications Committee.
She is Congresswoman
Cheri Bustos of Illinois.
She's the only member of the
House Democratic leadership
team from the Midwest.
Representative Bustos,
welcome to the program.
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS (D),
Illinois: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So,
before we talk about the
party, the Democratic
Party, let me just ask
you, having watched and listened
to that report from Virginia,
such conflicting opinions about
the Affordable Care Act.
How can you know the Democratic
Party's position is right, when
people are so conflicted over
it?
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS: Well, I don't
know if we're entirely right.
I think the way we need to look
at the Affordable Care Act is,
while it's made some tremendous
improvement in people's
lives, there is a lot of
work we need to do still.
Prescription drug prices are
too high and unaffordable
for too many people.
Co-pays, deductibles and
premiums are too high
for too many people.
And the folks who were
just talking on the
show demonstrate that.
Actually, what resonated the
most with me was right at the
end of the story, when you
had people saying, come
here, look us in the eye,
talk to us, listen to us.
And that is everything to
do with what we need to do
as Democrats going forward.
If we ever want to win back
the majority in 2018, that's
exactly what we need to do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well,
let's talk about that.
You represent your district,
the 17th District of Illinois,
northwestern part of the state.
You won by, what, 20 points
last fall reelection.
Donald Trump also won
by, what, just a fraction
of a point, but he won.
What was it in his message
that appealed to your voters?
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS: Well, we have
communities all over the Central
and Northwestern Illinois,
the area that I represent,
that have lost their
jobs to outsourcing.
Ag and manufacturing are
the two economic drivers in
my congressional district.
And so when you have people
who lost their jobs -- one
example was the Maytag plant in
Galesburg, Illinois.
It was 13 years ago this
September when Maytag sent every
one of their last jobs over to
Mexico.
And yet, all these years
later, the people who had these
jobs still haven't recovered
the wages to the same
level they did before.
I talked to the people who
then took another job who then
ended up being outsourced and
now are working, for instance,
as a clerk in a grocery store
making half what they did
a dozen years ago.
So, that's what resonated.
When people can hearken back
to making America great again,
that resonated with people who
have lost their jobs
and who aren't making
what they did before.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you have
been saying it's not enough for
Democrats to be against Donald
Trump.
It's clear Democrats disagree
with him on health care, on
the Russia story, and on and
on.
What is it that Democrats
should be saying?
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS: I think we
should be talking nonstop
about jobs and the economy.
We have the right policies.
We have a whole
make-it-in-America package
that focuses on making
products in America.
We have job retraining programs.
We have the right -- we
have the right programs,
but we talk about things
that are more divisive
than they draw us together.
I think if we talk about our
values and what we stand for
as Democrats, making sure that
hardworking men and women have
a chance to succeed -- when I
go home and listen to people,
that's what they want us
to focus on, not things
that divide people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is
there a single message?
Is it a combination of messages,
a vision that the Democratic
Party has that's not being
spoken?
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS: Well,
what we're doing, kind
of a behind-the-scenes
look at it, we are
working with the
Senate, the House.
We're also making sure that
the Democratic Congressional
Campaign Committee is informed
about what we're doing,
the Democratic Senatorial
Campaign Committee.
I'm told that this is the
first time where we have really
all worked together on this.
In my role in policy
communications, we have
met with more than 150 of
our Democratic colleagues.
We have met with all the major
caucuses, from the Congressional
Black Caucus, the Progressives,
the Blue Dogs, the New Dems.
And this is a very much
bottoms-up report, our
coalescence of ideas.
But what we will do is,
this will all be about
jobs and the economy.
We will roll this
out this month.
And then when all these members,
congressional members, go back
home for the August district
work period, we they be talking
about jobs and economy, and
we will be united on that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, that's a
little bit about the process,
but in terms of the vision, what
is the vision of the
party for the country?
When you say jobs and the
economy -- and I want to bring
in or mention something else
you have been saying, is
you have said to your fellow
Democrats, don't talk down to
voters.
Make sure they know
you respect them.
What is the message there?
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS: Well, the
message is, is that we may
be members of Congress.
It just means that we
have a different job.
We're no better, no
worse than anybody else.
It's just a different job.
I'm blessed by the fact that I
was a newspaper reporter, and
I have been in the homes in
some of the worst neighborhoods,
the toughest neighborhoods
of my region, to, you know,
the country club lot in life.
And so I'm comfortable talking
to any of those people.
And I'm also -- I know
that I'm no better or no
worse than any of them.
But back to your question
about what is it about jobs and
the economy, that we're going
to make sure that Social
Security is strong and
will grow stronger.
And we're not going
to cut benefits.
That's not something
we stand for.
I gave my mom a call today
and she said, what are they
doing to my health care?
She's 84 years old.
We want to make sure that
Medicare is strong and is not
facing financial difficulty.
We want to make sure that
pensions people that they have
paid into are not sacrificed.
We have got all the right
policies, but we have
got to talk about that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So is it a matter
of not changing or cutting
back on government programs?
Is that the Democrats' idea?
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS: I don't think
government is the entire
answer, but people want to know
that their member of Congress
is going to Washington and
fighting for them, that we
don't view that everybody
through the lens that it's all
partisan and we can't work with
Republicans.
I know the people of my
congressional district
send me to Washington
and expect me to get
a job done.
They want me to work hard,
because I make a pretty good
wage, especially in comparison
to a lot of families.
They want me to fight for them
if there's a fight to be had.
And they want me to get results.
And I don't think that's so
much different, whether you're
in San Francisco or New York
City or Chicago.
I think that's what people want
in their members of Congress.
And that's what,
frankly, they deserve.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just finally,
who is the leader of the
Democratic Party right now?
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS: Who is the leader?
Well, I suppose it depends
on how you look at it.
On the House side,
it's Nancy Pelosi.
On the Senate side,
it's Chuck Schumer.
At the DCCC, at the DCCC...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The
congressional committee.
(CROSSTALK)
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS: Yes, the
Democratic Congressional
Campaign Committee.
And then it's Tom Perez at the
Democratic National Committee.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So,
it's a group of people?
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS: Yes,
it's a group of people.
But I think we also have a lot
of young emerging leaders who,
in time, will take different
roles.
I'm proud of the fact that I
sit at the leadership table now.
The fact that I'm the
only Midwesterner, I
would like a little more
company sitting around
the table.
I think we're practical in the
Midwest, and I would like to
see a little more of us sitting
at the leadership table.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In fact, you
were just named by the Campaign
Committee the Democratic -- the
chairwoman of the Heartland
Engagement Committee.
Congresswoman Cheri Bustos,
thank you very much.
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We appreciate it.
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS: Thank you.